 The Legibility Project
If you can read written English, then this writing is legible to you. You know the meaning of the words, and your ability to understand what you read is immediate. It’s simple and direct. Automatic.
In a broader sense, a thing is legible if it is easy to understand in an almost automatic way.
Maps make the earth legible. A map makes it easy to know where things are. Legibility is not abstract, it’s real. It has a real impact. It makes things possible that weren’t before. With the right map, one can avoid hazards, find resources, or seek high ground, even in places one has never been. This is likely why maps were among the first shapes humans etched into cave walls more than 9,000 years ago.
Money makes goods and services legible. The invention of money (which happened only 5,000 years ago) provided the simple signal of a price to people for the very first time. It gave people an easy way to understand the value of different things and by extension the value that can be had by providing them. This simple, almost automatic form of legibility has put money at the heart of human endeavor ever since it was invented.
These systems of legibility are so integral to our lives that we don’t even notice them there. The sort of legibility that we have through language, maps, or money is so deeply embedded into the way we think, speak, and act that we hardly even notice how artificial and, in some cases, arbitrary these systems are.
Legends say that it was more than 4,000 years ago that we humans invented ways to make ourselves legible for the first time. It was the standardization of surnames and the creation of birth and death records (only required in England for the first time in 1066 AD) which made the collective “us” legible. Without this vital form of legibility, we could not have organized ourselves into the dominant social structures that most of the human population lives in today: cities and nations. Arbitrary though they may be, these large scale social systems are entirely enabled by names, maps, and money.
Names, maps, and money don’t give the state its power; however, no such thing as a modern state, city, or village would be possible without them. What is a modern society anywhere on the planet other than a physical place combined with a person’s name and with it a right and duty to give and receive value from a government? Indeed surnames, records, and property rights were created by people specifically so that we could join ourselves together into these types of social groups. As is often the case, here legibility is a necessary prerequisite for the progress that it enables. In this case, legibility of people was necessary for the state. 
Over the last 100 years, nearly every aspect of our lives and the world around us have been made more legible through technology.  Time after time, progress that had been impossible for millennia followed closely behind new forms of legibility. So much so that it would seem that legibility is foundational to progress. Without it, progress is halting, inconsistent, and volatile. With it, progress is quick and steady.
Consider the microscope. In life sciences, the invention of the microscope (only 400 years ago) made small things legible for the first time. This led directly and quickly to the discovery of the human cell (350 years ago) which in turn made life itself legible for the first time. All the breakthroughs that followed in cellular biology since are, in a real sense, built atop the legibility provided by the microscope and the electron microscope which followed it. 
A similar story exists for the telescope (invented 415 years ago) which made the universe legible. From Galileo's first observations of stars and moons 413 years ago, mankind was truly able to see our place in a much larger cosmic order. Subsequent advancements in telescopic technology have uncovered the enigmatic nature of black holes and the existence of dark matter and dark energy that constitute the majority of the universe.  Each of these revelations, brought to light in quick succession by the telescope, has profoundly deepened our understanding of the universe's workings and our place within it, much like the microscope’s revelations of the microscopic world.
Yet despite our newfound ability to see parts of our world for the first time, critical areas remain totally unmeasured and utterly illegible. Despite the rapid pace of technological advancement, these critical aspects of our lives seem likely to remain illegible for decades to come.
These are no small or trivial parts of our lives, but the most intimate, vital, and important things we know: e.g., the way that we affect the people around us, the effect that our actions have on the earth.  Even our own mental state, driven as it is by vast unconscious processes, is often inaccessible to us as we react in the moment. 
These are the Great Unmeasurables, each of them a subtle but vital aspect of our life that remains today entirely unseen. The Unmeasurables are so difficult to measure because they are intangible, interconnected, and Subjective. Intangible in that there is often nothing to physically measure, just a vague “feeling.”   Subjective, in that my experience of  “scared” or “happy” might be different from yours. Interconnected in that many of the Unmeasurables spread through networks, with effects that are hard to unwind. 
In a world driven by measurable factors, these Unmeasurables too often become victims of modern technology which can’t see them and therefore can't factor them into its algorithms of optimization. Systems designed to maximize something measurable can have devastating effects on these unmeasurable aspects of our lives.   
AI offers us a new kind of scope, a Data Scope, which when paired with the right data can understand patterns and subtle correlations better than any before it.  We are starting to see glimpses of technologies that could help illuminate some of the Great Unmeasureables. Ai might help unwind some of the challenges of understanding the interconnectivity of network effects and help provide new kinds of tangible measures for historically intangible and subjective qualities.  
In optimistic scenarios, the boost in legibility that new data and powerful AI will provide will usher in an era of quick progress in these invisible aspects of the world, where people will live obviously better lives. They will be subjectively happier, objectively healthier, and living in safer communities and in sustainable harmony with the planet. 
In more pessimistic scenarios, increases in new forms of legibility could undermine individual privacy, or inadvertently facilitate systems of scaled manipulation and more coercive and imposing societies. It's vital to be mindful of these risks as we evaluate new forms of legibility. Which is why we subscribe to these consideration principles.  
The Legibility Project is a collection of efforts to promote (Legibility Fund) and harness (Transparent Technology) measurements and systems of legibility that will enable humanity to live in a way that is more self aware, safe, and sustainable. 
Many of the advances in legibility will come from the simple interaction of market forces with new technologies. If there is a large addressable market that can make excellent use of particular new forms of legibility, then the business ecosystem will naturally provide them.  Making investments in these sorts of for-profit legibility endeavors is the work of the Legibility Fund.  Its mission is to promote businesses where legibility creates new value.  These include initiatives that range from neurotech to geospatial platforms to carbon measurement.  They include self sovereign identity, and alternative measurements of economic output.
In many cases, the data necessary to make things legible is already available in the public domain, but has remained inert and largely unobserved.  This is due to a combination of low market incentive for analysis of data along with relatively high costs to evaluate it all.  The plight of much public data is that it goes largely unseen and unmonitored.  Transparent technology exists to fill the gap, and to make public data legible on behalf of communities. 


 


